# terraform-provider-githubcrypt
Terraform Provider GitHub Crypt

## Why

According to the GitHub API documentation, to set a secret in GitHub (on any level: organization, repository, codespace, repo's environment, etc.), you need to encrypt the secret locally, and send to GitHub the encrypted value (see [details](https://docs.github.com/en/rest/guides/encrypting-secrets-for-the-rest-api?apiVersion=2022-11-28)).

The currently available (as of 2024-08) [terraform GitHub provider](https://github.com/integrations/terraform-provider-github) does not support automatic encryption of secrets sent to GitHub by the provider if you want the secret to rest in terraform state as encrypted.

While the terraform GitHub provider can encrypt the secret for you, if you pass it to the provider as plain text, it will store the plan text value in the terraform state, which is not recommended.

On the other hand, the provider does not offer any logic to encrypt the secret locally, and pass it as the encrypted value - the crypt logic is left to the user.

What is more, crypting the secret requires the user to have the `public_key` generated by GitHub for each organization, repository, codespace, environment, etc. But unfotunatelly, while the provider provides data source to fetch the `public_key` from GitHub on all the levels, the repository environments level is not curently supported. And yes - each repository environment has its own `public_key`...

Having this in mind, the `terraform-provider-githubcrypt` was created to provide the missing functionality:
* to fetch the `public_key` from GitHub for the repository environments.
* to encrypt the secret locally, and pass the encrypted value to the official GitHub provider.

This means that the `terraform-provider-githubcrypt` is rather not a standalone provider, but a helper provider, which should be used together with the official GitHub provider.

## How

The go code is based on the official [Terraform Provider Plugin SDK](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-sdk), and uses the [`go-github`](https://github.com/google/go-github) client as the interface to the [GitHub REST API](https://docs.github.com/en/rest?apiVersion=2022-11-28).

## Development

### Building the provider
The provider is not yet published to the Terraform Registry, so you need to build it yourself using the following steps:

1. Clone the repository
2. Run `go mod tidy` to install dependencies
3. Run `go install .` to build and install the provider binary to your `$GOPATH/bin` directory (or the `$GOBIN` directory if you have it set)

### Integrating the provider with Terraform

There are two tested and supported ways to integrate the provider with Terraform:

1. [Development Override](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/config/config-file#development-overrides-for-provider-developers)
2. [Explicit Installation](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/config/config-file#explicit-installation-method-configuration) using `filesystem_mirror` (recommended)

#### Development Override

This method is useful for local development and testing. It allows you to use the provider without installing it to the Terraform plugin directory, and provides broader logging and debugging capabilities.

To use the "development override" method, add the following to your `~/.terraformrc` file, and replace `<GOBIN>` with the path where the built provider binary is located:

```hcl
provider_installation {
  dev_overrides {
      "cdq.com/local/githubcrypt" = "<GOBIN>"
  }

  # For all other providers, install them directly from their origin provider
  # registries as normal. If you omit this, Terraform will _only_ use
  # the dev_overrides block, and so no other providers will be available.
  direct {}
}
```

In this mode, some features of terraform are not working or are limitted, e.g. `terraform init` will not work.


#### Explicit Installation using filesystem_mirror (recommended)

This method is useful for production use (e.g. in the GitHub Actions workflow), and requires the provider to be built and installed to the Terraform plugin directory.

To use the "explicit installation" method, add the following to your `~/.terraformrc` file, and replace `<HOME>` with the path to your home directory:

```hcl
provider_installation {
  filesystem_mirror {
      path = "<HOME>/.terraform.d/plugins"
  }

  # For all other providers, install them directly from their origin provider
  # registries as normal. If you omit this, Terraform will _only_ use
  # the dev_overrides block, and so no other providers will be available.
  direct {
      exclude = ["cdq.com/*/*"]
  }
}
```

In addition, run the following commands to move the built provider binary to the plugin directory checked by Terraform (assuming that the built provider binary is located in the `$GOBIN` directory):

```sh
export TERRAFORM_GITHUBCRYPT_PROVIDER_NAME=terraform-provider-githubcrypt
export TERRAFORM_GITHUBCRYPT_PROVIDER_SOURCE=cdq.com/local/githubcrypt
export TERRAFORM_GITHUBCRYPT_PROVIDER_VERSION=1.0.0
export OS_ARCH=darwin_amd64 # or linux_amd64 or other, see sections below
export LOCAL_PROVIDER_PATH=$HOME/.terraform.d/plugins/$TERRAFORM_GITHUBCRYPT_PROVIDER_SOURCE/$TERRAFORM_GITHUBCRYPT_PROVIDER_VERSION/$OS_ARCH/
mkdir -p $LOCAL_PROVIDER_PATH
mv $GOBIN/$TERRAFORM_GITHUBCRYPT_PROVIDER_NAME $LOCAL_PROVIDER_PATH/$(echo $GOBIN/$TERRAFORM_GITHUBCRYPT_PROVIDER_NAME)_v$TERRAFORM_GITHUBCRYPT_PROVIDER_VERSION
```

#### Calculating the OS_ARCH

The `OS_ARCH` value is a combination of the operating system and architecture, and is used to determine the directory structure in the plugin directory. The current terraform implementation uses the go `runtime` package to determine the OS and architecture.

To calculate it to match the Terraform expected format, build and run a tool that lives in the `tools` directory of this repository:

